TrEd ver. 0.5
=============

author:
  Petr Pajas (pajas@ufal.ms.mff.cuni.cz)

What is tred
------------

TrEd stands for "Tree Editor". It is a Perl/Tk-based graphical
editor for tree structures in the Fs format (for description see
http://ufal.ms.mff.cuni.cz/local/doc/trees/format_fs.html) used for
working with syntactical and tectogramatical trees in The Prague
Dependency Treebank. Because the format is a bit more general, this
program may also find some other applications. You may extend the editor
by writing your own macros (in Perl using functions defined
in tred.def standard definition file and functions defined in Fslib library
- see Fslib documentation for more detail).

There is also a batch (off-line) variant of TrEd called btred -
"Batch-mode Tree Editor" - which allows you to run macros on trees
without having to use the graphical environment. See also examples
directory for few more scripts that may serve you in a similar way as
btred and may be simplier to use in some cases. 

What's required
----------------

You only need Perl v5.6 or higher and Perl/Tk library v800.022 or
higher. TrEd may run on following platforms:

  Windows 9x,NT (download perl and perlTk from ActivePerl)
  Linux (with glibc2 = libc.6, otherwise you probably won't 
         be able to compile Perl/Tk)
  Possibly other platforms (other UN*X platforms as Perl5
         and perlTk should be abailable for them;
	 AFAIK there is perl and perlTk on MacOS too)

Please NOTE that this program is being developed and tested under
Linux, and is also widely used on Windows. Support for all other
platforms either experimental or theoretical.

	 
Installation
------------

This topic is described in the INSTALL file.


Also note that:
---------------
- .tredrc is your configuration file, it is text-based so that you may
edit it

- you may print from TrEd either to file or using a command. I TrEd is
able to generate PostScript and/or PDF. On Windows desktop you will
probably have to use Adobe Acrobat Reader or GhostView to print the
resulting file (unless you have installed st. like lpr i.e. from
cygwin).

- printing to PostScript uses Type1 font (arial by default), printing
to PDF requires a TrueType font

- you may define macros and bind them to keyboard events. This is done
preferably in tred.mac file, but you may use also tred.def which
should however contain moreless st. like preliminary definitions. Let
the files included with this distributions serve you as examples (the
macro language is perl, it is evaled directly form TrEd, so you may
use its variables and functions - but be carefull!!). The active node
is pointed to by variable $this. To change active node simply assign
this variable. Root of the current tree is $root. You may (as in
Fslib.pm) change or refer to node's attribute values by 
  $node->{'atrname'} To access node's neighbours use the following
methods: $node->parent, $node->firstson, $node->lbrother and
$node->rbrother functions.  To rearange nodes in the tree you may use
macros CutNode/Cut and PasteNode (Paste is more low-level and you
should *not* therfore use it).  Also, you may find useful macros
NextTree,PrevTree,GotoTree to move between trees and Next/Prev macros
to trace along the current tree. See tred.def and Fslib.pm
documentation form more detail.

Note that there is a convertor called graph2tred which allows you port
your macros written for Michal Kren's editor Graph to Perl macros
which may be used by TrEd withough any further modifications. For more
detail see README.grap2tred file in this distribution.


LICENSE
-------

This software is covered by GNU General Public License (GPL).
Full text of the GPL can be found at http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html.